Welcome to the Life Church Podcast.
We are an Acts 2 42 community, a family on a mission to bring a life of Jesus to warranty.
We hope you're ready to hear what God has to say to you today through His Word and by His Spirit.
We are in a series called The Roman Road where we're looking at what salvation means.
We've already had two excellent sessions.
Jeremy started us off.
pointed out the problem.
Jeremy's session was session.
It sounds like seminars.
Jeremy talked about the fact that all have sinned.
All have sinned.
There isn't anyone who can say, nah, I'm all right.
And that was very clear from Scripture.
And then Helen took us through Christ died for our sins last week.
So we are working through
kind of working through the book of Romans and looking at what salvation means to us.
And today we're looking at confess and believe.
Confess and believe.
I want to read you some scripture before we start.
And I didn't put it on the screen because I want you to just listen to me.
It sounds a bit attention-seeking, doesn't it?
We just listen to me.
But I do want you to just listen to me.
There will be some scripture on the screen later, but I want you to just listen to this.
It's Romans chapter 10.
And Paul is writing to the Romans, and he's expressing.
In fact, Romans is some of Paul's best stuff, yeah?
I think.
Romans is some of Paul's best stuff.
I think one of the reasons Romans is some of Paul's best stuff is because Paul was writing to people he didn't know.
When he writes to the Ephesians, when he writes to the Philippians, he writes to the Galatians, these are all churches that he knows.
These are people that he knows.
He knows what's happening in their lives.
He knows what's happening in their churches.
And so there is more of a focus to those letters.
But to the Romans, Paul didn't know these people.
And so it's like, I'm going to write to you Christians in Rome, and I'm going to give you my best stuff.
because I don't know what's happening in your lives.
I don't know where you are.
So I'm going to make this make as much sense as far as the gospel is concerned so that even though you don't know me and even though I've not met you, you will understand.
At the end of this letter, you will understand what the gospel is all about.
And so Paul writes to the Romans and he expresses lots of incredible things.
If you've not read the book of Romans, can I encourage you to read the book of Romans?
Half an hour.
Take a half an hour.
Maybe this afternoon.
Have a little go.
Yeah.
I will check next week.
There'll be a clipboard at the door.
Romans 10, so Paul is writing about the children of Israel, the Israelites, and he's saying, brothers, my heart's desire and prayer to God for them, the children of Israel, the people who were Israelites, is that they may be saved.
For I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.
They're excited and enthusiastic about God, but not according to knowledge.
For being ignorant of the righteousness of God and seeking to establish their own, they did not submit to God's righteousness.
For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to everyone who believes.
For Moses writes about the righteousness that is based on the law, that the person who does the commandment should live by them.
But righteousness based on faith says, do not say in your heart who will ascend into heaven.
That is to bring Christ down.
Or who will descend into the abyss?
That is to bring Christ up from the dead.
But what does it say?
The word is near you, in your mouth and in your heart.
That is the word of faith that we proclaim.
Because if you confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
For with the heart one believes and is justified and with the mouth one confesses and is saved.
For the scripture says, everyone who believes in him will not be put to shame.
For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek, for the same Lord is Lord of all, bestowing his riches on all who call on him.
For everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.
Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.
Our key verse for this morning is Romans 10, 9.
If you confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
We could pray there, but we're not going to, we're going to go on.
I think the word confess there is
is not particularly helpful.
And let me say why the word confess is not helpful.
Because I think when we hear the word confess in today's day and age, we're thinking of admitting to something that's wrong.
Yeah, let me admit to something that's wrong and give you an example of what that means.
This week, I annoyed my wife.
Yeah, I know.
You're looking at me like, that's not possible, Nick.
Some of you are looking at me like that.
And some of you are like, yeah, Nick, it rains a lot in the UK.
So what?
It's the same kind of thing, Nick annoyed his wife.
We were in London.
And we're starting a train station.
And I read something that said, if a stranger sits next to you, keep a straight face, look straight ahead and say, did you bring the money?
So I showed it to Lisa, and we both laughed at it because it's quite funny.
And then someone sat next to Lisa.
And I whispered to Lisa, did you bring the money?
She did a lot of giggle, that was fine.
We were reading, we carried on the stranger left, someone else sat to Lisa, sat next to Lisa, and I whispered again, did you bring the money?
Lisa smiled, and then the person left, and I thought this is great, but actually I'm a little bit too quiet.
So from that point, every time someone sat next to Lisa, I was saying did you bring the money, but I was getting louder and louder.
Did you bring the money?
And then he got to the point where someone sat next to Lisa.
I didn't say anything, but Lisa just glared at me.
She just turned and glared.
So I confess that this week I annoyed my wife.
I'm admitting to something that I did.
I'm not asking for your forgiveness, because it was great.
But I'm admitting to something that I did.
That's how we sometimes feel the connotations of the word confess.
But this word actually would be better I think if it was declare.
And actually the word does mean confess and it also does mean declare.
If you declare with your mouth the Lord Jesus.
If you declare with your mouth that Jesus is Lord.
What Paul is saying here to us is this, God is not looking for anonymous Christians.
God is not looking for people who have some kind of conviction in their heart.
Yeah, I follow Jesus.
Yeah, but I have never said it out loud and I have never admitted to it and I've never declared it out loud.
The Bible says, if you declare with your mouth, if you confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord, there is an expectation that this is not something that we hide from.
This is something that we speak up about.
I'm not asking.
I'm not asking you to just pause tomorrow at work and stand up and say, excuse me, everyone, I just want you to know that Jesus is Lord.
I mean, if you feel you need to do that, that would be amazing.
I'm not asking you to do that.
But what I'm pointing out is scripture says, if we declare with our mouth that Jesus is Lord.
And so there needs to be a conviction and expectation in our hearts that recognizes that being a Christian is not something that we shy away from.
It's not something that we hide.
This is just personal to me.
It's not personal to you.
It is public.
The point of baptism when we have baptism is a public declaration of our faith.
We go through the waters of baptism.
It's kind of like our old lives are being buried and then we're raised again into new life with Jesus.
That's what baptism is.
And after that, it doesn't mean that we don't talk about Jesus ever again.
I've been baptized.
That's it.
I'm done.
I've done the thing.
I went through the waters, I've done the thing.
No, there needs to be, there needs to be those opportunities where we speak about Jesus, where we admit that we, we admit, where we declare that we are people who follow Jesus.
And maybe, just so you know, I don't tend to say that I'm a Christian, I tend to say I'm a Jesus follower, because sometimes Christian means lots of things to different people, but I wanna be clear,
I am following Jesus.
I'm a Jesus follower.
And if that sounds odd, it sounds odd, but that's who I am and that's what I do.
I'm a follower of Jesus.
And maybe in your conversations this week, it might be good to drop that in.
Just by the way, I'm a Jesus follower.
Why do we find it so hard to admit that we are Christians?
Why do we find it so hard to say that sometimes?
Is it a fear of rejection?
Are we worried about what people will think about us?
Are we worried about maybe we'll have some persecution?
Does that really matter?
And does that compare to the truth of knowing who Jesus is?
I don't think it does.
If we declare with our mouths that Jesus is Lord.
Jesus is Lord is a fun phrase, isn't it?
We sang it this morning.
He is Lord, Lord of all.
And it was a great moment as we were singing that together.
What do you think that means that Jesus is Lord?
The word Lord means master or ruler or someone who owns something.
So when you say Jesus is Lord and when I say Jesus is Lord, the words that we're saying are He is my master.
He is my ruler.
I belong to Him.
Now those are words that we can say and it's quite easy to say words.
But does our life reflect the fact that we belong to Him?
Does our life reflect the fact that we belong to Him?
Apparently, did some little bit of research.
Apparently, back in the days, the Knights Templar, sounds great, doesn't it?
The Knights Templar, before they went out to battle, they would have a kind of a church service and they would be baptized.
So these knights with their armor would get into the river and the priesthood pray over them.
But the fascinating thing about that is they would all get into the water and they would submerge themselves except their swords.
Their hands would be holding their swords out of the water.
And it was like they were saying, Jesus, you can have all of me, but not this.
Because what I do in the kind of, in the battle, what I do in war, that's all down to me and that's what I'm doing.
But you can have every other part of me.
But that's Jesus is not Lord then.
Because Hudson Taylor Missionary to China once said, if he is not Lord of all, he's not Lord at all.
Yeah, something like that.
He'll be behind me, I'm sure.
If he's not Lord of all, he's not Lord at all.
And if Christ is not Lord of everything, he is not Lord of anything because it negates the word Lord.
So Paul is saying to us, if we declare with our mouths that Jesus is
Lord, if we declare with our mouths that Jesus is Lord, that is surrender.
That is saying, I give myself to you.
Full stop.
There's no caveats.
There's no, but not this, but not here, but not when.
It's just I give myself to you.
If you confess or declare with your mouth that Jesus is Lord,
I love the story, and I really connect with this guy in scripture, the story of Thomas.
You know, Thomas was one of the disciples, and he seemed to ask a lot of questions.
There's nothing wrong with asking questions.
Please do not think there's anything wrong with asking questions.
You know, when Jesus rose from the dead, people were coming back and saying, hey, we've seen the Lord, he's risen.
And Thomas was like, yeah, well, I've not seen him.
And maybe he was,
Maybe he was hopeful that he was true, but wasn't quite sure that it happened.
Maybe he was a little bit annoyed that he hadn't met Jesus yet.
We don't know what was happening in him, but he said on one occasion, maybe he was fed up with people saying they'd seen Jesus and he felt left out.
He said, listen, unless I can put my fingers in the palm of his hands where he was nailed to the cross and I can put my fingers in this side where he was stabbed with a spear and in his feet, unless I can touch those wounds,
I'm not believing it.
And then there was a moment where Jesus appears in the room and Thomas is there.
And Jesus, so beautifully, I love what Jesus does.
He says, Thomas says his name, come and put your hands in my wounds.
Because Jesus hears you, let me just say Jesus hears you.
It doesn't matter where you are, Jesus hears you.
And Thomas responds beautifully, Thomas says, my Lord and my God.
There is a moment where Thomas
really fully expresses who Jesus is to him.
He says, my Lord and my God.
And as people who follow Jesus, or maybe people who are thinking about following Jesus, there needs to be a moment where we're able to say, Jesus, you are my Lord and my God.
And if you did that once, that's amazing.
But let me tell you, this needs to be something that happens every day.
Today, Jesus, let me remind myself
that you are my Lord and my God.
Today, Jesus, let me remind myself that regardless of what decisions I have to make, what conversations I get involved in, you are my Lord and my God and I belong to you.
And so what you want is more important than what I want.
What you expect from me is more important than what I expect.
If you declare with your mouth that Jesus is Lord,
and believe in your heart.
So it's not just the declaration, it's not just the stuff that comes out of our mouths, it's the stuff that happens inside of us as well.
Believe in your heart.
And I think maybe historically we're much better at the believing in our hearts bit than the declaring with our mouths bit.
Maybe we're better at, yeah, this is what I feel inside, but I don't want to talk about it.
Or maybe there's some people who talk about a lot of stuff, but actually there's nothing really in terms of depth happening inside.
And I love the way that Paul brings these two things together.
He says, if you declare with your mouth and believe in your heart, declare with your mouth and believe in your heart.
He doesn't just leave a, it's not just a full stop there though.
It's not believe in your heart, end off.
He says, believe in your heart, what?
That God raised him from the dead.
This is the pinnacle, this is the foundation, this is the important thing.
If you had to hang anything, if you had to hang your faith on anything, this is it, the resurrection.
If you had to hang your faith and point your finger at any point in history, point your finger at any point in scripture, it is the resurrection that we hang our faith on.
And Paul is saying, if you confess to the amount of Jesus is the Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
Understanding that Jesus rose from the dead is incredibly important to who we are and what we believe.
Understanding that the resurrection happened is important.
Understanding that the tomb was empty is important to us.
It is important to us.
There are lots of thoughts around the resurrection and there are lots of people who have spent their time and their energy
trying to disprove the resurrection.
And why have they done that?
Because they know that if they can do that, they have kind of mitigated everything that people have said and believed about who Jesus was.
I love that C.S.
Lewis quoted, he was talking about Jesus and he was saying, you can't just say that Jesus should have had the quote, really, but I think I can remember it.
You can't just say that Jesus is a good moral teacher.
You can't say that because a good moral teacher would not say the things that Jesus said.
Jesus said some quite provoking things and quite controversial things, and a good moral teacher would not declare himself to be the son of God.
So don't say Jesus was a good moral teacher.
Either he was who he said he was, or he wasn't.
But you can't say he was a good moral teacher.
In fact, he goes on to say if somebody said those things, he would either be completely nuts, a lunatic, he would be a liar, or he would be Lord, liar, lunatic, or Lord.
And that's how CS Lewis puts the whole idea of what Jesus did on the cross and who Jesus said he was.
He's either a lunatic, he's either a liar or he is Lord, because this is what Jesus said and this is what happened.
But of course over the years there's lots of people who have kind of pointed fingers at the resurrection and said that these things didn't happen.
And there are a few people, there's a guy called Frank Morrison, who wrote a book called Who Rolled a Stone Away, which is a great book.
It's an old book, but it's a great book.
He set out to disprove the resurrection and then found that he couldn't and then wrote a book, Proven the Resurrection, which is great.
I love it when that happens.
There's another guy called Josh McDowell, who wrote a book called Resurrection Factor.
He was a university.
His Christian friends used to really annoy him.
And so he thought, you know, I'm tired of having these conversations with you about Jesus.
I'm going to prove the resurrection didn't happen.
So he did his research.
and couldn't prove that the resurrection didn't happen.
They gave his life to Jesus and then went into ministry, which is great.
There's a guy called Lee Strobel, who was an investigative journalist who, same thing, just wanted to disprove the whole thing to annoy his Christian friends and then went through his own investigation and then came to the point where he thought, actually,
This all makes sense.
And they wrote a book called The Case for Christ.
So I recommend those books.
They're really good books.
I recommend those books.
But let me just point out a few things.
Let me just point out a few things about the resurrection, because the resurrection is quite important to us as people who follow Jesus.
Some of the things that people have said are it was the tomb was unknown.
It was an unknown tomb.
that they put Jesus' body somewhere after his crucifixion, and then the disciples had no idea where Jesus was, and they just made up stories that he'd been raised from the dead, which is nonsense because we know that Jesus actually was in a borrowed tomb.
We know someone's name, Joseph of Arimathea, Lent.
lent someone your tomb.
It's a bit of a weird concept, isn't it?
But that's what they did, lent Jesus his tomb.
So we know where the tomb was.
And if it was the wrong tomb or they didn't know where the tomb was, this is another theory.
When the women returned on Sunday to honor Christ, they went to the wrong tomb and it was empty and thought, oh, Jesus is risen.
But that means that everybody after that point also went to the wrong tomb, which doesn't make any sense.
There are other things that this is just a legend that people made up after Jesus had died and decayed.
They just made the legend up.
But 1 Corinthians 15 verse 6 says, at one point Jesus appeared to 500 people.
That's not legend, that Jesus appeared to 500 people.
There's another one that says it was a...
It was a spiritual resurrection, I love these.
It was a spiritual resurrection.
Jesus' body decayed in the grave and that his real resurrection was spiritual.
No, because he appeared to more than 500 people at one time afterwards, so no.
There's another one that said people who saw Jesus afterwards were hallucinating.
No, because 500 people do not have the same hallucination.
That's not how hallucinations work.
There's another one that said his bodies were stolen by the disciples.
This is my favorite, it's not my favorite, second favorite one.
The body was stolen by the disciples.
For his body to be stolen by the disciples and the disciples made stories up about Jesus being resurrected.
They would have to roll the stone away, but before they could roll the stone away, remember what they would have to do?
Get through the Roman guard.
There were Roman soldiers guarding the tomb.
That would have lasted six seconds and it would not have gone in their favor.
Yeah, you do not mess with the Roman soldiers.
They were fishermen.
They were not skilled in, you know, Jewish arts.
I was going to say martial arts.
Jewish martial arts.
They were not skilled in these things.
They would not have stood a chance against the Roman soldiers.
So that doesn't make any sense.
And if that happened, then why would Pilate have said to the guards, hey guys, yeah, we know that the body is gone, the stones have been rolled away.
This is what you are to say.
The authorities told the soldiers what to say.
The authorities told the soldiers what to say after Jesus had risen from the dead.
Two more.
One is that the authorities moved Jesus' body to a safe place so they could be sure that no one would make stories up about his resurrection.
Doesn't make sense.
Why would they do something that was the cause of all of their problems?
Oh, his body's not there.
He's raised.
Actually, they would just say, actually, no, here it is.
But doesn't make any sense.
This is my absolute favorite.
There's a theory that says that Jesus didn't die, he fainted.
And then, because the tomb was cool, he came back to himself, he rolled the stone away, he fought off the guards, and then appeared to his disciples as Lord of life.
That is almost more miraculous than Jesus raising from the dead, almost more miraculous.
The resurrection is really important to us.
It is really important to us.
And as people who are followers of Jesus, we've got to this point because we have declared that Jesus is Lord and we've believed in our hearts that He raised Him from the dead.
That is important.
It is important.
You know, one of my, one of the things that I do in the summer, people say, Nick, you're a teacher, you have so much holiday.
No, I do not have so much holiday and don't bring it up because it's annoying because I go back to work on the 16th of August.
That is not a lot of holiday.
All right, I go back to work in the middle of August.
One of the things that we have to go back to work in the middle of August for college lecturers is enrollment.
Yeah, all of the students gather GCSEs and their A-level results, and then they come to enroll.
And what the college could do is, I'll cut this out, what the college could do is they could employ other people to do their homework.
But no, we got the lecturers back in.
They can do some extra work in the summer.
So we get, actually, it's a good idea, because if parents bring the students in and they want to ask,
questions about the courses, the people who teach the courses are the best people to answer those questions.
So I get it.
So what we have to do is we have to sit at the desk and then students are coming in and they're saying, these are my grades.
Can I come and do the course?
And we can look at the grades and we can say, yes, you can do the course or no, you cannot do the course.
And the reason we can do that is because each course has been set up with something called entry requirements.
They are lifesavers, entry requirements.
Because it's a bit mean to say to someone,
No, you can't do the course.
Sorry.
And then not have a reason to say you can't do the course.
I don't like the way you look.
You can't do the course.
You have to have a reason to say you can't do this course.
This course is not for you.
And the reason is the entry requirements.
You do not have five GCSEs, grade nine to four.
So you can't do the course.
I'm sorry.
But here's something else is always something else.
Here's something else you could do.
Yeah.
So entry requirements are quite important.
This verse
is a great verse because it says, if you declare with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart, it does not say, if you are good, if you behave yourself, if you've never said anything or done anything wrong, if you were born in a particular place, if you were bright, if you've been to Bible college, if you attend church regularly,
If you serve, it should say if you serve.
If it doesn't.
If you serve, it doesn't say any of those things.
There are no entry requirements.
The only entry requirement to be someone who enters into and experiences the salvation that Jesus won for us.
The only requirement is that you accept it.
That's it.
That's the only requirement that you accept what Jesus has already done.
There are no entry requirements.
All we have to do is declare with our mouths and believe in our heart.
All we have to do is declare with our mouths and believe in our heart and accept what Jesus has done.
That's all we have to do.
So I want to close in prayer.
So I just want you to bow your heads for a moment.
Paul makes it very clear.
There's a very, very simple thing for us to do.
We have to confess with our mouths and we have to believe in our hearts.
That is it.
And maybe you've done this and that's really good.
But maybe you haven't done it and there's an opportunity for you to do that today.
And so I want you to just in the quiet with your eyes closed, just to think this incredible gift of salvation that Jesus won for us is free.
But it wasn't cheap.
Jesus gave his life for us to be able to experience the salvation.
But the promise is very simple.
If you declare with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
Maybe for some of us, it's a bit of reassurance today.
Maybe we just need to be reminded of how simple the gospel is.
Maybe you did that a long time ago and you've slipped into trying really hard.
And there's nothing wrong with trying really hard.
But it doesn't impact on your salvation because your salvation is free.
I saw a lot of pray for my friends in this room.
I pray that
we would have a revelation, a fresh understanding of who you are and what you have done for us.
And thank you for the simplicity of the gospel that it is just declaring that you are Lord, recognizing who you are and saying that yes, you are Lord, you are master, you are ruler over us and believing that you raised from the dead in our hearts.
I pray that
Maybe for those of us who haven't made those connections, I pray that there would be a connection between what we say and what we believe.
Help us, Jesus.
Maybe for those of us who do believe, but a little bit nervous about saying it out loud, I pray you give us boldness, that in those moments where we have an opportunity to talk about you and to talk about what you've done in us, that we would not shy away from those moments.
And I pray, Jesus, that you help us to live in that space
of confessing with our mouth, declaring with our mouth and believing in our hearts to live in that space so that we know that we are saved, so that we know who's we are, and so that we can truly declare that you are Lord of us.
Help us, I pray, in Jesus' name.
Amen.
We've come to the end of this week's message.
We hope you've been impacted and inspired.
Please keep up to date with everything that's happening by visiting our website at www.livechurchgoingsin.com